# Metrics

Metrics take the following form:

```
    metric_name[{label_1="value_1", label_2="value_2}]metric_value
```

An example is shown below:

`node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0", mode="idle", instance="server1"} 25879.86` or 
`node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1", mode="steal", instance="server1"} 100.5`

Each combination of labels and value e.g `cpu="1", mode="steal", instance="server1"` creates its own time series

Prometheus also stores the timestamp at which the metric was created in the Unix timestamp format

**Type and Help Attributes**

Type attributes for metrics show the type of the metric i.e. (counter, gauge, histogram, summary)
Help attributes for metrics show a description of the metric

**Counter Metric**

Counter metrics are useful for measuring how many times an event happened, e.g. number of exceptions, total number of requests, total number of job executions etc.

**Gauge Metric**

Gauge metrics are useful for measuring what the current value of of an item being measured is. The values can go up or down. Examples include Current CPU utilization, Available system memory, number of concurrent requests etc.

**Histogram Metric**

Groups observations into configurable sizes. For example you can have the following buckets for how long your app's response time is. i.e < 1s, < 0.5 s or < 0.2 s. Data being measured will be grouped in these buckets.

**Summary Metric**

Similary to histograms. They track the percentage of observations that fall below a threshold. For example 20% of all requests were completed in 0.3s and 50% of all requests were completed in 0.8s etc.

